Sample snippets for NuGet authentication scenarios (#1382)
dotnet/dotnet-docker: samples/snippets/nuget-credentials.md

> # Best Practices for Managing NuGet Credentials in Docker Scenarios

Reviewer: Even though it is discussed in the linked secrets document, I think this doc should still call out the scenarios in which the secrets are written to disk as part of the Docker build process.

In the Dockerfile below, there are two stages: build and runtime. The build stage is responsible for building the application project. It defines two `ARG` values which match the names of the environment variables used in the the `nuget.config` file. But the build stage is not the final stage of the Dockerfile so the `--build-arg` values that are passed to the `docker build` command do not get exposed in the resulting image. All the final stage is really doing is copying the built output of the application from the build stage since that's all that's needed to run the application.

```
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/sdk:3.0 AS build

ARG Nuget_CustomFeedUserName
ARG Nuget_CustomFeedPassword

WORKDIR /app

# Copy csproj and restore as distinct layers
COPY *.csproj .
COPY ./nuget.config .
RUN dotnet restore

# Copy and publish app and libraries
COPY . .
RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out  --no-restore

FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/runtime:3.0 AS runtime
WORKDIR /app/
COPY --from=build /app/out ./
ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "dotnetapp.dll"]
```

This Dockerfile would be built using this command:

```

> $ docker build . --build-arg Nuget_CustomFeedUserName=<username> --build-arg Nuget_CustomFeedPassword=<password>

Reviewer: Throughout all of your samples, I noticed that you specify the build context path as the first argument.  While there is nothing wrong with this, it is opposite of all of the Docker Inc samples and the vast majority of the samples in the Docker ecosystem.  I recommend that our samples should follow the standard patterns used to avoid possible confusion.

```

> Passing the username and password values to the `docker build` command in this manner can be useful in automated scenarios when those values are stored as environment variables on the Docker host machine.

Reviewer: ...or retrieved from an external secrets vault/manager/store

```
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/sdk:3.0 AS build
WORKDIR /app

ARG FEED_ACCESSTOKEN
ENV VSS_NUGET_EXTERNAL_FEED_ENDPOINTS \
    "{\"endpointCredentials\": [{\"endpoint\":\"https://thalman.pkgs.visualstudio.com/_packaging/test/nuget/v3/index.json\", \"username\":\"docker\", \"password\":\"${FEED_ACCESSTOKEN}\"}]}"

RUN curl -L https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Microsoft/artifacts-credprovider/master/helpers/installcredprovider.sh  | bash

# Copy csproj and restore as distinct layers
COPY *.csproj .
COPY ./nuget.config .
RUN dotnet restore

# Copy and publish app and libraries
COPY . .
RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out --no-restore

FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/runtime:3.0 AS runtime
WORKDIR /app/
COPY --from=build /app/out ./
ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "dotnetapp.dll"]
```

_Note that a script is called to install the Credential Provider. When `dotnet restore` is run, the Credential Provider is invoked to resolve the credentials and it retrieves them from the `VSS_NUGET_EXTERNAL_FEED_ENDPOINTS` environment variable._

This Dockerfile would be built using this command:

```
$ docker build . --build-arg FEED_ACCESSTOKEN=<access_token>
```

> Passing the access token to the `docker build` command in this manner can be useful in automated scenarios when that value is stored as an environment variable on the Docker host machine.

Reviewer: Same comment as above applies here.

## Best Practice: Passing secrets by file with Docker BuildKit

> Docker BuildKit provides some enhanced functionality for passing [secret information](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/build_enhancements/#new-docker-build-secret-information) when running `docker build`. This avoids the use of `ARG` values which could potentially be exposed in the resulting image unless you're disciplined in defining your multi-stage build. But it also requires that the secret data be stored in a file on the Docker host machine during the `docker build`. If your `nuget.config` file contains credentials and is already stored on the Docker host machine, then this may be a good option for you. *Be careful when storing credentials on disk. Make sure that the machine and file are properly secured.*

Reviewer: Provide a link to more info on BuildKit.

## Best Practice: Use a multi-stage build to protect nuget.config passed by build context

By using multi-stage builds, you can use the build context to pass a set of files to the Docker build that are used just for building the application and avoid having all of those files end up in the final image. If your `nuget.config` file contains credentials and is already stored on the Docker host machine, then you may want to consider passing it via the build context for the Docker build (also see [Passing secrets by file with Docker BuildKit](#best-practice-passing-secrets-by-file-with-docker-buildkit) for a related pattern). *Be careful when storing credentials on disk. Make sure that the machine and file are properly secured.*

Even though using a multi-stage build is a good technique to help avoid exposing credentials in the final image, it should be known that the intermediate layers produced by the build can still expose those secrets locally on the Docker host machine.

Here's an example `nuget.config` file containing the credentials:

> ```

Reviewer: I noticed there are some MD standards and formatting violations.  I utilize the markdownlint extension in vscode to see these.  I think it would be a good idea to try to address these as our customers utilize a variety of MD viewers to read our samples.  This may cause adverse affects with some tools.  A few of the top issues are
1. code blocks and lists should be surrounded by blank lines
2. code blocks should have a language specified.

The rest of our samples adhere to the standards pretty well so it would be nice to continue that within the snippets.

Author: Thanks.  I had the linter installed but it wasn't working properly.  Fixed now.

Let's use the following sample `nuget.config` file which is stored on the Docker host machine:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<configuration>
  <packageSources>
    <add key="public" value="https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json" />
    <add key="customfeed" value="https://mycustomfeedurl"  />
  </packageSources>

  <packageSourceCredentials>
    <customfeed>
      <add key="Username" value="<username>" />
      <add key="ClearTextPassword" value="<password>" />
    </customfeed>
  </packageSourceCredentials>
</configuration>
```

The Dockerfile references the `nugetconfig` secret with the `--mount=type=secret` syntax and access it at its default path of `/run/secrets/nugetconfig`:

```
# syntax = docker/dockerfile:1.0-experimental

> FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/sdk:3.0 AS build

Reviewer: I feel it would be valuable for all four snippets to do the same thing.  This example stops immediately after restore.  Why not show the full sample with the runtime stage?

Author: Not sure how I missed that.  Fixed.

There are two aspects to be aware of when it comes to protecting credentials:

1. _Exposing credentials in an image that is published to a registry._ This is the most obvious scenario. You don't want consumers of your image to have access to data they should not have. The options listed below demonstrate how to prevent this from happening.
2. _Exposing secrets locally on the Docker host machine._ This isn't necessarily an issue; it depends on your build processes. Just be aware that while your published image may not be exposing sensitive data, there can be sensitive data stored on the Docker host machine that you may want to clean up depending on how the machine is managed in your build workflow. For example, when using Azure DevOps pipelines with a hosted agent, there's no need to clean up data because the virtual machine of the build agent is automatically deleted at the end of the build. But if you manage your own agent, you're in charge of cleaning any leftover state should it be necessary.

> ## Best Practice: Use a multi-stage build to protect nuget.config passed by build context

Reviewer: (I thought I made this comment last time, but I can't find seem to find it.  Please forgive me if I am repeating myself.)

This heading is very specific where as the other aren't.  With the `Best Practice` prefix convention, I think it is useful to fully describe the best practice.  For example, several of the other best practices rely on multi-staged builds to prevent the secret from being included in the final image yet it is not included in the best practice statement.  My suggestion is to either make the headers complete best practice statements or drop the `Best Practice` prefix and use a more traditional short heading.

# Best Practices for Managing NuGet Credentials in Docker Scenarios

There are often cases when your Dockerfile needs to build a .NET project that make use of a NuGet package located in a private feed. How do you properly provide your Docker build access to that private feed in a secure manner? The snippets below provide recommended approaches you can take.

## Preventing Leakage of the Credentials

> The main aspect that we need to concern ourselves with in all of these approaches is to prevent leakage of the credentials to consumers of the published Docker image. It can be easy to do if you're not careful. Let's first go over some Docker concepts and then we'll see how their usage can lead to leakage of sensitive data.

Author: I've factored out the "Docker concepts" section into its own document that focuses on how to protect secrets in general when building Docker images.  In that document, I've described your two points here.

### Docker Layers

The concept of Docker layers is much too complex of a topic to discuss here so please read the [Docker documentation on layers](https://docs.docker.com/storage/storagedriver/) if you're not already familiar with them. The key thing to understand about a Docker image is that all of the layers from which it is composed are available to be peeked at. If a file was added in one layer and then deleted in a subsequent layer, that file may not exist in the resulting container layer but it still exists in the layer that added the file. And each of an image's layers are accessible to consumers of the image.

> #### Example

Author: Yes, I like this better.

-rw-r--r--  0 root   root      1776 Oct 09 11:27 175ff829656a84d0d904d6184a7ea083b034dd78ac990802f9304646f81b363f.json
drwxr-xr-x  0 root   root         0 Oct 09 11:27 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70/
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root         3 Oct 09 11:27 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70/VERSION
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root       477 Oct 09 11:27 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70/json
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root      2048 Oct 09 11:27 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70/layer.tar
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root       354 Dec 31  1969 manifest.json
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root        87 Dec 31  1969 repositories

$ tar xf example.tar 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70/layer.tar

$ tar tvf 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70\layer.tar
-rw-r--r--  0 root   root        4 Oct 09 11:27 secret.txt

$ tar xf 539b8293941b5f2648d90c94e0076a3e8f9b274dd260c511321d029700a9be70\layer.tar secret.txt

$ echo secret.txt
secret
```

### ARG Instruction

> The [`ARG` instruction](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#arg) provides a way to pass in values that the Dockerfile can consume at build time. The important thing to realize about `ARG` values is that they can be exposed in the `docker history` by the layer that consumes them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`ARG` instruction](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#arg) provides a way to pass in values that the Dockerfile can consume at build time. The important thing to realize about the `ARG` instruction is that `ARG` values are embedded into the resulting image.  An easy way to visualize this is to view the image layers with the `docker history` command.
```

#### Example

This example shows how the use of multi-stage builds can prevent data from being leaked in the resulting image. The final stage copies in the `bar.txt` file from the base stage but does not copy the `foo.txt` file. Because of that, the resulting image doesn't contain the `foo.txt` file. Also, even though the secret value is passed in the `--build-arg` for the `docker build` command, the `docker history` of the resulting image doesn't expose that value; it only shows the layers of the final stage none of which make use the `MY_SECRET` `ARG`.

```

> # Dockerfile

Author: Since I've factored this out into the general purpose secrets document, I'm leaving this as is.

FROM debian as base

ARG MY_SECRET

RUN echo $MY_SECRET > foo.txt
RUN echo bar > bar.txt

FROM debian as final

COPY --from=base bar.txt .
```

```
$ docker build . -t example --build-arg MY_SECRET=foo

$ docker run --rm example ls bar.txt
bar.txt

$ docker run --rm example ls foo.txt
ls: cannot access 'foo.txt': No such file or directory

$ docker history --format "{{ .CreatedBy }}" example --no-trunc
/bin/sh -c #(nop) COPY file:fcd11fceabc5279bf6c4356a288665bdd0a19391f4214976c3687e9ba5cb548a in .
/bin/sh -c #(nop)  CMD ["bash"]
/bin/sh -c #(nop) ADD file:770e381defc5e4a0ba5df52265a96494b9f5d94309234cb3f7bc6b00e1d18f9a in /
```

> ## Best Practice: Restore from Feeds Using Basic Authentication

Reviewer: The header isn't optimal to me.  I relate this to the .NET FX Design guidelines.  Their `do` statements are complete on their own and then are followed with detailed discussion and examples.  This header on it's own does not fully explain the best practice pattern.  It is also a little ambiguous with the last best practice which also uses basic authentication.  The difference is how the credentials are passed.

      <add key="ClearTextPassword" value="<password>" />
    </customfeed>
  </packageSourceCredentials>
</configuration>
```

The Dockerfile needs to make use of a special syntax to describe the secret it's attempting to access. The Dockerfile must enable the new syntax features by overriding the default frontend (see the [documentation](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/build_enhancements/#overriding-default-frontends) for more info). Next, it uses the `--mount-type-secret` [syntax](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/build_enhancements/#new-docker-build-secret-information) to access the secret from the `/run/secrets/` location.

```
# syntax = docker/dockerfile:1.0-experimental

FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/sdk:3.0 AS build
WORKDIR /app

# Copy csproj and restore as distinct layers
COPY *.csproj .
RUN --mount=type=secret,id=nugetconfig \
    dotnet restore --configfile /run/secrets/nugetconfig
```

When building this Dockerfile, BuildKit must be enabled and the `--secret` option is used to provide the path to the `nuget.config` file:

```
$ DOCKER_BUILDKIT=1 docker build . --secret id=nugetconfig,src=nuget.config

> ```

Reviewer: Given each of the best practices end up with the credentials residing within a file located on disk, why don't we include the basic example of having a NuGet.config file with the credentials embedded copied into the Dockerfile?  e.g a combination of best practice #1 and #3.  This could be example #0 and #1 could build on it and call out the benefits.

Author: Added this as another option.
